Hey YouTube, hey Brent.
- Hello.
- Hey, I'm excited to have you on the show.
We're gonna have a lot of fun.
Before we get to the official podcast,
I just want to tell people listening,
if you have questions or thoughts for us,
please throw them in the live chat,
and we'll try to make them part of the show.
If you're watching this afterwards,
well, there's no live chat,
but we still appreciate you watching the show.
All right, ready to kick this off?
- Yes, I am. Thanks for having me.
- All right, yeah.
Thank you for having me. I'm excited to talk about some of this stuff.
I am absolutely excited about it as well.
I feel there's a huge renaissance coming,
happening right now or has been happening
for a little while now around Python performance.
Yeah, no, it's exciting to see,
especially in just the last couple of years.
You definitely see these different focuses, whether it's,
you know, improving single threaded Python performance,
multi-threaded Python performance,
you know, Python in the browser.
There's a lot of really cool stuff happening right now.
- Absolutely.
Yeah, if we could talk WebAssembly and PyScript
and all that, that is a very exciting thing.
There's probably some performance side around it,
and I think it'll be, you know,
maybe something we could touch on,
but that's not the main topic for today.
We're gonna talk about just the core CPython
and how it works, which is gonna be awesome.
some work you've done with the team there at Microsoft
and your contributions there.
Before we get into all that stuff though,
let's start with your story.
How'd you get into programming in Python?
- Yeah, so I originally studied computer engineering,
so like hardware stuff at UC Irvine.
And around my third or fourth year, so like 2017,
I encountered Python really for the first time
in a project setting.
Basically, it was a senior design project.
We get to make whatever we want.
And so we made this cool system that basically,
you point cameras at a blackjack table
and it detects card counters.
And if you want to do something like that in four months
or whatever, Python is kind of the way to go.
Yeah, the CV stuff there is really good, right?
Yeah, so it was NumPy and OpenCV
and that was kind of my first exposure to this stuff.
And so I learned that I like developing software
a lot more than developing hardware.
So I kind of never looked back and just went full in.
About a year later, so like 2018, I opened my first PR to the CPython repo,
and it was merged, and a year after that, one night...
Oh, there's this standard library module called "Module Finder".
Basically, it's one of those ones that's kind of just a historical oddity,
and it's still in there.
Basically, you can run it over any Python script.
It detects all the imports, and so you can use it
to build an import graph.
And I forget exactly what I was using it for.
I think it was for work.
And I ran into some bugs that had been just kind of lingering
there for years, and so I submitted patches
for a bunch of them.
And so that was kind of my first experience contributing
to open source in general.
that PR was actually open for a while.
It was open for like, I think it was like a month or two
or something like that.
So in the meantime, I contributed other things
to like mypy and typeshed,
but that's still my first open source contribution.
If you count the data was open.
- Yeah, does it count as a beginning
or the end of the PR, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
'Cause those can be very different things sometimes.
- They can be very different.
You know, we have now in CPython,
we have the, just in Python I guess,
we have the developer in residence with Lukas Schlinge
and he's there to sort of facilitate
making that a lot faster.
I feel like people's experience there might be
picking up speed and improving.
- Yeah, no, I think that's a great thing.
And in general, just seeing this kind of shift
towards full-time Python core development,
being funded by these big companies
is really exciting to see.
and I think it improves the end contributor experience,
the user experience, and just gets things done, which is nice.
I don't have any numbers, but I imagine there are fewer
of those lingering months-old PRs than there were
back when I first started.
Way, way long ago, four years ago.
[laughter]
[SAM] So far back in the past. [ADAM] So long, so long.
So yeah, so that was like 2018.
2019, I became a member of the Triage team,
which is basically a team for people who are
kind of more involved in Python than just your average Drive by contributor.
So while they're not full core developers with...
they basically can do anything a core developer can
except vote and actually, you know, press the merge button.
So that was really nice because it made doing things like reviewing PRs easier,
tagging issues, closing issues, that sort of thing.
And then a year later, I became--
- How did you get the experience for that?
Like how do you, you know, it's one thing to say,
well, I've focused on this module and here's this fix,
and it's another to say,
you give me anything from CPython and I'll assess it.
- Well, it wasn't give me anything from CPython,
it was, you know, it made it part of my morning routine
to, you know, wake up, go to a coffee shop, order a coffee,
and just for a half hour look at newly opened issues.
And I see, yeah, yeah, well, I focus mostly on PR review for new contributors.
So basically, I had filters set up that said, you know, show me all the PRs open the last 48 hours
from a new contributor, because I thought, okay, my first contribution experience wasn't that great.
It'd be great if, you know, these people who have never opened a PR to see Python before,
can get a response within 48 hours.
whether that's telling them to sign the contributor license agreement or formatting fixes or pinging the relevant core dev or whatever.
So that was kind of how I dove into that.
All this terminology that you're using, PR and stuff. No, this is great.
What I was going to say is that this is new to Python, right?
It wasn't that long ago that Python was on Mercurial or before then Subversion.
It's, you know, it's coming over to GitHub
is kind of a big deal and I feel like
it's really opened the door for more people
to be willing to contribute.
What do you think?
- Oh, it absolutely lowered the barrier to entry
for people like me.
Like using the old bugs.python.org was tough at first,
but I eventually kind of got used to it
just in time for it to be replaced with GitHub issues,
which I much prefer.
But I have a hard time seeing myself, you know,
emailing patches around or, you know,
I have a lot of respect for people where that was the development flow, you know, and a
number of years ago.
Yeah, yeah, cool.
Yeah.
So I became a core developer in 2020.
And a, I guess it was about exactly a year ago, almost exactly a year ago, I joined the
Python performance team here at Microsoft.
Were you at Microsoft before then?
No, I was not.
I work for a company called Research Affiliates
in New York Beach.
And I think you actually had my old manager,
Chris Arisa on the show.
- I have had Chris on the show.
That's fantastic.
Small world, huh?
- Yep.
Small Python world.
- Yeah, small Python world.
Just a couple of million of us.
No, that's great.
So this brings us to our main topic.
And let's start at the top, I guess.
There's the Faster Python team, I guess.
I don't know.
How do you all refer to yourself?
- Yeah, we refer to ourselves as the Faster CPython team.
I think internally, our distribution list
is the CPython Performance Engineering team, which
sounds a little gnarlier, but it's a lot wordier.
- That's a cool title to have on a resume, isn't it?
Yeah, yeah, I think I'll use that one.
(laughing)
- There you go.
There's been a ton of progress.
Some of this work was done in 3.10,
but there's this article here
that I got pulled up on the screen.
So it says Python 3.11 performance benchmarks
are looking fantastic.
That's gotta make you feel good, huh?
- I mean, they were looking fantastic back in what, June?
They're a small bit more fantastic now.
So yeah. - Yeah, exactly.
This article's from June, so it's only better from there.
- Yep, yep.
Yeah, and no, it's really exciting.
And like I said, this is a performance jump
that at least since I've been involved in Python,
we haven't seen this in a point release,
where we're seeing 25, 30%,
sometimes more improvements for pure Python code
rather than kind of the five, 10, 15% range
that might be more typical.
And again, I think that's kind of a product of this very conscious effort,
whether it's my team or a lot of people that we interact with.
So for example, Pablo, Release Manager, Strength Council Member at Bloomberg,
has been working a lot on this stuff with us.
Outside contributors, two that come to mind are Dennis Sweeney and Ken Jin.
There's definitely been a focus on this, and it's paying off,
which is really exciting, like you said.
- Yeah, and maybe a little bit more in parallel
instead of a cooperative effort,
but there's also the Cinder folks over at Meta Facebook.
- That's absolutely a cooperative effort.
You know, even though Cinder isn't necessarily,
we're not merging all of Cinder back into CPython,
several of the changes are being upstreamed into CPython.
And in fact, just earlier this week on Tuesday,
we had, I think like a two hour meeting
where the sender team walked our team through
how their JIT works.
So it's, yeah.
So it's, even though, yeah, it can be seen
as a parallel effort, I think it's very collaborative.
- I think also, I, like you, am very much blown away
at the step size of the performance improvements.
It's just super surprising to me
that a 30-year-old language and a 30-year-old runtime
can get that much better in that short of a time.
Yeah, and I think, again, I feel like I'm
going to keep coming back to this,
but having full-time people dedicated to this,
having teams of people dedicated to this,
I think that's a big part of unlocking this.
Because some of the things that are
required for those big jumps are larger architectural changes.
That a single volunteer who's doing this on their free time
probably wouldn't have been able to do
without coordinating with others
and without throwing a significant amount of effort at it.
- Yeah, I mean, there are people out there,
core devs who have done amazing stuff.
Shout out to Victor Stinner.
I feel like a lot of the performance stuff
that I've seen in the last couple of years,
he is somehow associated with some major change,
but the changes that are being undertaken here,
they're much more holistic and far reaching.
And it really does take a team,
I think to make it reasonable, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
And what's cool about the 3.11 effort is
it's a combination of kind of both sorts of changes.
So we have a bunch of kind of one-off,
very targeted changes,
probably five or six or 10 of those.
And then we have one or two of these kind of larger changes
that we can build upon in the future
and they're never really done.
which, you know, that's exciting
'cause it means we get to keep making Python faster.
- It is exciting.
I think another area to just highlight real quick
before we get into too much detail is,
correct me if I'm wrong,
but none of this is particularly focused
on multi-core parallelism, right?
- No, so one member of our team, Eric Snow,
he's basically the sub-interpreter guy.
- Exactly.
- Yeah, so he is focusing most of his time
on a per interpreter kill and all that sort of stuff.
But I mean, all the numbers that you're looking at here
and all of our benchmarks,
it's all single threaded, single process.
If you're running Python code,
it will get faster without you changing your code,
which is awesome.
- Yeah, it's super awesome.
I wanna highlight that because if Eric manages to unlock
multi-core performance without much contention or trade-offs.
Or if you've got an eight-core machine
and you get 7x performance by using all the cores,
that would be amazing.
But all of this work you're doing applies to everyone,
even if they're trying to do that stuff.
So even if somehow we get this multi-core stuff,
the computational multi-core stuff working super well,
the work that you're doing and the team is doing
is gonna make it faster on every one of those cores.
So they're kind of multiplicative initiatives.
So if we could get a big improvements
in the parallel stuff,
it's only gonna just multiply how much better
this aspect of it's gonna be for people who use that.
- Yeah, no, absolutely.
It's great to be kind of pursuing
all these different avenues
because they pay off in different timeframes.
Some of these are longer efforts.
In Eric's case, the seven term per effort
is a very long effort.
and I think he's done a great job of sticking with it and seeing it through.
And some of these we're seeing in point releases, and so they absolutely build on each other.
Like you said, if you can get a 7x increase from subinterpreter just to throw out a number,
but Python as a whole got 25 or 30% faster, then you're seeing much more than a 7x increase.
Right, absolutely. So very, very exciting times.
Two things before we get into the details of the particular interpreter and stuff.
Tell me a bit about this team.
I interviewed Guido and Mark Shannon a while ago.
When was that?
That was about a year ago, I suppose, about this plan when they were kicking it off.
We didn't have these numbers or anything, but we did talk about what we were doing,
and he talked about the team that he's working with there.
Certainly, it's just more than the two of us.
Tell us about the team.
Yeah, so I think there are seven people.
So there's Guido and Mark,
Eric and me, as we mentioned,
another core developer, Irit,
and then one other engineer, El,
and a manager for the team
who also does some engineering effort as well,
and is a member of the triage team, Mike Trappo.
- Yeah.
- Nice.
Yeah, yeah.
He's, he worked on PyOxidizer.
- Piedide.
Piedide.
- Piedide, yeah.
I don't know why.
(laughing)
- There's so many pi something or something.
- Molecule on the end.
Exactly, exactly.
- Yeah, yeah.
- That's right.
That's the foundation for PyScript actually,
which is quite cool.
- Yeah.
- The other question.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
The other thing that I want to ask you about is,
so we have these numbers,
to ask you about is, so we have these numbers and visibility
into Python 3.11 that's got a lot of conversations going,
people are saying they're looking amazing and fantastic
and other nice adjectives, but this is in beta,
maybe soon to be RC, I'm not sure what,
what is Python 3.11 status these days?
>> 3.11, we just released our last release candidate,
I think this week.
So this...
Basically, the idea is this, the final release candidate
and the actual 3.11.0 release should be the exact same thing.
So unless we find any serious bugs that merit fixing before 3.11.1,
the release candidate is going to be 3.11.
So this is as close to stable as any of the pre-releases get.
Okay, cool. So the reason I ask that is
a lot of the work you've been doing recently is probably on 3.12, right?
Yes, so beta freeze, which is basically when we go from alphas into betas,
and there's no more, basically, new features allowed at that point.
That happens every May.
And so everything that we've been working on since May goes into 3.12.
Are you excited about the progress you've made?
Yeah, very excited.
- So it's still coming along well?
- Yes, yeah.
And it's nice we still have a lot of time
before the next beta freeze too.
- All right, yeah, awesome.
Let's talk really quickly about the faster-cpython
thing put together by Mark Shannon.
Guido called it the Shannon plan.
And the idea is how can we make Python five times faster?
If we could take Python and make it five times faster,
that would be a really huge deal.
And again, none of that is multi-core.
If you could somehow unlock all the cores and you've got eight,
that's 35 or 40 or something like that.
So this is an ambitious plan.
It started out with a little bit of work with 3.10.
Is that when the adaptive specializing interpreter first appeared?
Or did it actually wait until 3.11 to show up?
No, I don't believe we-- we don't have it in 3.10.
Yeah, I didn't think so either.
Unless I'm missing something.
Yeah.
Yeah, so that's in 3.11.
The rest of it looks accurate though.
- Yeah, cool.
So some stuff, yeah.
So then basically that was stage one.
Stage two is 3.11 where there's a bunch of things
including kicking over the interpreter.
We're gonna talk about the specializing interpreter.
- Yep.
- But bunch of small changes here.
And then stage three for 3.12 is JIT.
Have you guys done any work on any of the JIT stuff?
Right now, it's not looking like 3.12 will ship with a JIT.
We think there are other changes that we can make
that don't require a JIT that will still pay off.
We're probably planning on at least experimenting
with what a JIT would look like.
Like I said, we already have gotten kind of a guided tour
of Cinder's JIT, and so we're talking kind of high-level
architecture and prototyping and that sort of thing.
But I would be surprised if 3.12 shipped with a JIT.
But it's a long effort.
So starting now is a big part of that.
Yes, actively.
>>Yeah, cool.
All right, well, this was put together quite a while ago,
back in 2020, as a here's our plan.
And of course, plans are meant to evolve, right?
But still, looks like this plan is working out quite well
because of the changes in performance
that we saw already in 3.11 beta, and pretty fantastic.
There are a bunch of changes here about, you know,
things like zero overhead exception handling.
I believe it used to,
there was an overhead for entering the try block.
Even if it was anywhere--
- Every time you went in or out of a try except block.
So even if I did try pass, accept pass,
there was overhead associated with that.
- Right.
- So basically we would, you know,
push a block that says, oh, if an exception happens,
jump to this location.
And now what we do is we realize, oh, we actually have that information ahead of time when we're actually compiling the bytecode.
So since the common case is that an exception isn't raised, then we can, you know, store that data in a separate table and say,
oh, if an exception is raised at this instruction, then jump here without actually having to do any of that management at runtime.
So it's a little more expensive, I believe, if an exception is raised.
But in the case where an exception is not raised,
I think it is basically as close to truly zero cost as possible.
That's really cool.
Yeah.
I think that's the way it should be.
Exceptions, as the word implies, is not the main thing that happens.
It's some unusual case that has happened, right?
So not always, but often means something has gone wrong.
So if something goes wrong, well,
you kind of put performance to the side anyway, right?
- Yeah, well, and a lot of the sort of optimizations
that you wanna see, especially in, for example,
JIT code or whatever,
exceptions are the sort of thing that mess that up,
where if an exception is raised,
okay, get out of the JIT code,
go back to the slow land where we know what's going on
and have better control of context and everything.
But yeah, no, it's really exciting to see.
It's really cool design.
And yeah, it was Mark Shannon who did this.
It was Mark Shannon who did a lot of this stuff.
>>Yeah, very cool.
So there's a bunch of improvements coming along.
But what I want to really focus on here
is the PEP 659, the specializing adaptive interpreter.
And in addition to being on the team,
You've created a really cool project,
which we're gonna talk about as soon as we cover this one,
about how you actually visualize this
and maybe even change your code to make it faster,
understanding how maybe opportunities might be missed
for your code to be specialized or adapted.
- Yeah, that's 659.
I mean, the concepts are not too difficult,
but the implementation is really hairy.
So I think it definitely deserves to kind of be gone over
in some detail because it's really cool when you get down to how it actually works and what it's doing to your code.
Is this the biggest reason for performance boosts?
I think it's the most important reason for performance boosts.
I mean, any performance boost kind of depends on what you're doing, right?
Like we did, for example, Pablo and Mark worked together on making Python to Python calls way faster and way more efficient.
So if you're doing lots of recursive stuff, that's going to be the game changer for you.
>> Okay.
>> You know, we did all sorts of these--
>> If you spend all your time writing loops
that just do try, accept, try, accept.
>> Yeah. >> That one's better.
>> Yeah, if you're, yeah,
you've got try, accept, and tight loops,
or, you know, if you're,
if you do lots of regular expressions,
then our improvements in that area will probably matter
more than this, but
this is cool because
we can build upon it
to kind of unlock
additional performance improvements in the future.
We can kind of get into that once we have a better idea of how exactly it works.
Yeah, sure. When I look at PEPs, usually it'll say what its status is
and what version of Python it applies to.
And I see this PEP, it doesn't say which version it applies to and its status is draft.
What's the story here with that?
Yeah, so I'm actually not sure what the story is behind the PEP itself.
I think it's a good informational document that explains, you know, the changes that we did get into Python 3.11.
But I don't think the PEP was ever formally accepted.
As you can see, it's just an informational PEP.
So it's kind of more the design of what exactly we're doing and how we plan to do it.
Right, because it's not really talking about the implementation so much as like, here's the roadmap,
and here's what we plan to do and stuff, right?
Yeah, there's a lot of pros in there that says,
here's how we might do it, but no promises.
We could change this literally anytime.
And we have.
The design has changed fairly significantly
since this PEP was first published,
but we've updated the PEP so it can remain accurate.
Yeah, cool.
OK, so the background is when we're running code,
It's not compiled and it's not static types, right?
It's because it's Python, it's dynamic
and the types could change.
They could change because it just uses duck typing
and we might just happen to pass different things over
and we do have type hints, but as the word there is,
it applies as a hint, not a requirement
like C++ or C# or something.
So you have to have the CPython runtime
be as general as possible for many of its operations, right?
Yeah, absolutely. And beyond just types, things like I could create a global variable at any time.
I could delete a global variable at any time.
I could add or remove arbitrary attributes from objects.
All these sort of very Pythonic things about Python, or un-Pythonic depending on how you're looking at it.
You know, these are all sort of things that would never fly in compiled languages.
Yeah, and they mean you can't be overly specific about how you work with operations.
So, for example, if you say, "I want to work with..."
like, you know, "call this function and pass it the value of x."
Well, where did x come from?
Is x a built-in?
Is it a global variable?
Is it at the module level?
Is it a parameter? Is it a local variable?
All these things have to be discovered at runtime, right?
- For the most part, yeah.
- Yeah, for the most part.
Yeah, so part of this adapting interpreter is
it will run the code and it says,
like every single time they said load this variable called x,
it came out of the built-ins, not out of a module.
And so we're gonna replace that code, specialize it,
or quicken it, I've heard of quickening,
so I'll have to work on the nomenclature a little bit.
- Yeah, we can clear up the terms in a bit, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, but you're gonna take this code
and you're gonna replace it,
don't say just load an attribute
or load a value from somewhere
and go look in all the places,
you're like, no, no, no, go look in the built-ins
and just get it from there.
And that skips a lot of steps, right?
- Yep, yeah.
- Or maybe, I'm doing math here
And every single time, it's been an integer.
So let's just do integer math and not
arbitrary addition operator.
Yeah, exactly.
With a huge asterisk that if it does become a global variable
or if it does start throwing floats at your addition
operation that we don't set fault or even
produce an incorrect result.
Right, because you could say, use x.
But before that, you might say, if some value is true,
x equals this thing.
It goes from being a built-in to a local variable,
or some weird thing like that.
If it overly specialized and couldn't fall back,
well, bad things happen, right?
Yeah, it would be surprising if you
were getting the len function from the built-ins
over and over and over.
And then you, for some reason, defined len as a global.
Python, the language specification
says it's going to start loading the global now,
regardless of where it may have lived before.
And that's the same for attribute accesses.
If you used to be getting an attribute off the class,
and then you shadow it on the instance,
you need to start getting it from the instance now.
You can't keep getting it from the class.
That's incorrect.
Right, and this is one of those problems that arises from this
a static dynamic language that can be changed as the code runs.
Because if this was compiled,
wherever those things came from and what they were,
they can't change.
Their type was set, their location was set.
And so then the compiler can say,
"Well, it's better if we inline this,"
or "It's better if we do this machine operation
that works on integers better,"
or some special thing like that, right?
It doesn't have to worry about it falling back.
and back and I feel like that ability to adapt and change
and just be super dynamic is what's kind of held it back
a lot, right?
- Yep, and I like that word that you used, adapt,
'cause that's kind of a big part
of how the new interpreter works.
You can change your code and the interpreter adapts
with you.
If X starts being an attribute on the instance
rather than from the class, well, soon the interpreter
will learn that sometime later after running your program
and then, okay, start doing the fast path
for instance access rather than class access.
- Right, okay, well, let's start there.
How does it know, right?
It doesn't compile, so it has to figure this stuff out.
I run my code, why does it know
that I can now treat these things
X and Y as integers versus strings?
- Yeah, so stepping back a little bit,
how does this new interpreter work?
So the big change, the headline is that the bytecode instructions
can change themselves while they're running.
So something that used to be a generic add operation
can become something that is specialized, which is kind of--
it's a specialized instruction is the terminology
we use for adding two integers or adding two floats.
And so this happens sort of in a couple different phases.
After you've run your code for some amount of time,
basically, after we've determined
it's worth optimizing, because optimization isn't free,
so some things only run once.
It's module-level code or a class body.
There's no reason to optimize that at all for later runs.
And so we have heuristics for, OK, this code is warm.
And that's a term that you hear in JITs often,
because JITs have even higher overhead for specializing.
And so basically, after we've determined
that a block of code is warm, we quicken it,
which is that term that you used earlier.
And this basically means walking over the bytecode instructions
and replacing many of them with what we call adaptive variants.
And you can see an example in the PEP,
But to walk through that example,
if you have an attribute load, once the code is quickened,
after we've determined it's warm,
we walk over all the instructions.
And all of the load attribute bytecode instructions
become load adder adaptive.
And what those adaptive instructions do
is when we hit them, when we're actually
doing the attribute load, in addition to actually loading
the attribute, they will do some fact finding.
they'll gather some information and say,
OK, I loaded the attribute.
Did it come from a class?
Did it come from the instance?
Did it come from a slot?
Did it come from a dict?
Did it come from a module?
There's a bunch of different possibilities.
And so using that information, the adaptive instruction
can turn itself into one of the specialized instructions.
So the example you have here on the screen,
it can either be load at or instance value or module
or slot.
And what the specialized instructions do is really cool.
Basically, they start with a couple of checks
just to make sure that the assumptions are holding true.
So for a load adder instance value,
we check and make sure that, for example, the class
of the object is as we expect, that our attribute isn't
shadowed by a descriptor or something weird like that,
or that we're not now getting it off of a class object
or whatever.
And then it has a very optimized form
of getting the actual attribute.
There's a lot of expensive work that you
can skip if you know that you have an attribute that
is coming directly off of the instance itself.
>> Right, or another one is load at or slot.
Slots are really interesting for Python performance.
and they kind of capture more than a lot of the stuff,
the difference of the possible and the common.
And by that I mean, it's possible that every time
you access a field off of a class,
that it was dynamically added
and it came from somewhere else and it's totally new
and it could be any type.
What's more likely though, is it's,
the customer always has a name
and the name is always a string, right?
And with slots, you can sort of say,
I don't want this particular class to be dynamic.
And because of that, you can say,
well, it doesn't need to have a dictionary
that can evolve dynamically,
which improves the access speed
and the storage and all of that.
And here you all are pointing out that,
well, we could actually have a special op code
that knows whenever I access X, X is a slot thing,
skip all the other checks you might have to do
before you get there.
- Well, yeah, and even accessing the slot
is going to be faster.
So I'm not 100% brushed up on how load adder slot works,
but I mean, the slots are implemented using descriptors.
So to get the slot from your class,
you still, or from your instance,
you still need to go to the class,
look up the attribute in the class dict,
find the descriptor, verify it's a descriptor,
all the descriptor. - Figure out it's offset
into that list, yeah.
- Exactly.
We can do it even faster than that.
So even if you do have slots,
this happens really fast without even any dictionary lookups,
I believe.
We say, has the class changed?
No.
OK, cool.
We'll get to this later, but we remember
what offset the slot was at last time,
and we just reach directly into the object and grab it.
There's no dictionary lookups.
We're not calling any descriptors
or doing anything like that.
It's about as close to a compiled language
as a dynamic language could be.
- Yeah. - Just verify,
class hasn't changed, okay, reach in,
I remember where it was.
- Very cool, and it's all work,
you know, I tried to kind of line this up,
saying the possible and the common.
Most likely, your code is not changing,
and when it's well-written,
it's probably using the same type.
You know, it's not like, well, sometimes it's a string,
and sometimes, like, that is the quote seven,
and sometimes it's the actual integer seven.
Like, it should probably always be one.
You just don't express that in code unless you're using type ints, right?
And they're not enforced.
Yeah, and getting back to the adaptive nature
and making sure that we are correct.
If we had something that was a slotted instance
coming through a bunch of times and then suddenly you throw a module in
or something with an instance dictionary or something else,
or maybe the attribute doesn't exist or it's a different type.
Those quick checks that I mentioned that happened
before we actually do the vast implementation of loading a slot.
If any of those checks fail, then we basically
fall back on the generic implementation.
We say, oh, our assumptions don't hold.
Go back.
And if that happens enough times, then we
go back to the adaptive form, and the whole cycle
repeats itself.
So if I'm throwing a bunch of integers
into an add instruction, and then later I stop
and I start throwing a bunch of strings into an ad instruction,
we'll do the generic version of ad for a little bit
while we're kind of switching over.
But then the interpreter will kind of get the hint
and start specializing for string addition later.
And it's really cool to see that happen in practice.
So we shouldn't-- we being Python developers that
write code that just executes without thinking too very much
about what that means--
we should not have to worry or maybe even know that this is happening, right?
If everything goes as it's supposed to, it should be completely transparent to us.
- Yes, the only way that you should know that anything is different about 3.11
is your CPU cycles, the cloud hosting bill at the end of the month.
You should be able to upgrade and if behavior changes, that's a bug.
Tell us about that.
- Yeah, yeah, for sure.
Well, going from this adaptive version,
the adaptive instance sounds slightly more expensive
than the just the old school load adder, for example,
'cause it has to keep track
and it does a little bit of inspecting
to see what's going on.
But then the new ones, once it gets adapted and quickened,
it should be much faster.
Is there a chance that it gets into some like weird loop
where just about the time the adaptive one
has decided to specialize it, it hits a case
where it falls back and it ends up being slower
rather than faster before?
- Well, yeah, the worst case scenario would be
you send the same type through n number of times
and then right when it's gonna try to specialize you,
send it through a different type.
- Exactly, whatever, if n is the limit,
like if it goes through n plus one times
and then trips it back?
Yeah.
>> Yeah.
Yeah, so that would be sort of the worst case scenario.
But we have kind of ways of trying
to avoid that, if at all possible.
So for example, if we fail one of those checks,
we don't immediately turn into the adaptive form.
We will do it after that check has
failed a certain number of times.
And as just a concrete example, that number
of times that we have hardcoded is a prime number.
So it's less likely that you'll fall into these sort
of patterns where it's like, oh, I send three ints through
than a string, three ints than a string.
It'd be hard to get that worst case behavior
without being intentionally malicious.
Sure.
And on the long--
also, by the way, we've got to keep in mind
these are extremely small steps in our code.
we might have multiple ones of these happening
on a single line of what looks like,
oh, there's one line of code,
like, well, there's five,
however many instructions,
bytecode instructions happening,
and some of them may be specialized
and some of them not, right?
- Yeah, exactly, and so the overall effect
definitely smooths out,
where, sure, you may have a worst-case behavior
at one or two or three individual bytecode instructions,
but your typical function is gonna have
much more than that,
even a smallish function is going to have 20 or 30 instructions
if it's doing anything real.
Yeah, if you care about its performance, it'll be doing a lot there.
Exactly, and so some will specialize successfully, some won't,
but in general, your code will get 25-ish percent faster.
Is there a way you could know?
Is there a way that you might be able to know if it's specialized or not?
We'll get to that.
It looks like if I go and use the DIS module,
DIS, not for disrespect, but for disassembly.
So you can say, import this,
and then maybe from DIS, import this.
You say DIS and give it a function or something,
and it'll write out the bytecode of what's happening.
Does all of this mean that if I do this in 3.11,
I might see additional bytecodes than before?
Instead of loadAdder, would I maybe see the loadAdder instance value?
Will I actually be able to observe these specializations?
Yeah, so if you pass a keyword argument to your disutilities,
then yes, you will be able to see this.
Okay, but if I don't, for compatibility reasons,
like loadAdderAdaptive and loadAdderInstance,
those are just going to return as loadAdder?
LoadAdder, exactly.
So the idea is anyone that's currently consuming the bytecode,
they shouldn't have to worry about specializations
because the idea is they're totally transparent.
So they should only see what the original bytecode was.
But if you want to get at it, then yeah.
If any of the disutilities you can pass in,
adaptive equals true.
And that will show you these adaptive instructions.
And again, you'll only see them if it's actually
gets quickened, meaning if you run it a dozen times or so.
- Okay, so if I wrote, say, a function,
so often what you're doing if you're playing with dis,
is like you write the function,
and then you immediately print out the dis output.
Maybe you've never called it, right?
- Yeah.
- And so that might actually give you a different,
even if you said yes to the specialization output,
that still might not give you anything interesting.
- It won't give you, yeah, it'll just give you
as if you hadn't passed the keyword argument.
'Cause again, this all happens at runtime,
So if the code isn't being run, nothing happens.
You know, we don't specialize code that isn't ever run.
What counts as warm?
How many times do I got to call it?
The official answer is that's an implementation detail of the interpreter,
subject to change at any time.
The actual answer is either 8 calls or 8 times through a loop in the function.
So if your function has a loop that executes more than 8 times,
or if you call it more than 8 times.
just calling your function eight times should be enough to quicken it.
Right, well, maybe that number changes in the future, but just having to say
like, is it 10 or is it 10,000? You know what I mean?
Where is the scale before I see something?
Yeah, if you want to make sure it's quickened but you don't want to take up too much time, I'd say just run it a couple dozen times.
As shorthand, when we're writing tests and stuff, we do like 100 or 1000.
Okay.
>> Because that also gives it time to actually adapt to the actual data that you're sending
through it.
Because it's not enough to just quicken it, then you'll just have a bunch of adaptive
instructions.
They actually have to see something.
>> Yes, well, now we're paying attention, like great.
Now it's time to pay attention too, right?
>> Yeah, and you'll see that too, because if you have any sort of logic flow inside
of your function, when you're looking at the bytecode, any paths that are hit will be specialized,
and any paths that aren't obviously won't
because we don't specialize that code.
- So it has a bit of a code coverage aspect.
- I did think about it.
- If you look at it, you might see part of your code
and it's just, it's unmodified
because whatever you're doing to it
didn't hit this else case ever.
So.
- Yeah, well, and that's what's really exciting
about this too is when you're,
if you run your code a bunch of times
and then you call this on it,
you see a lot of information that would potentially be useful
if you were, for example, JIT compiling that function.
You see at every addition site if you're adding floats or ints.
You see at every attribute load site, whether it's a slot or not.
You see where the dead code is, you see where the hot code is.
All that stuff is getting back to what I said,
how this enables us to build upon it in the future.
Not only can we add more specializations or specialize more opcodes
or do that more efficiently, we can also use that information
to infer additional properties about the code that
are useful for other, faster, lowered representations
of the code.
>>Luis: OK.
Yeah, I can certainly see how that might inform some kind
of JIT engine in the future.
>>Jeremy: Yeah.
>>Luis: Out in the audience, I don't know how much Julia
you know, but there's a question that says,
- This sounds similar to Julia.
I have no idea whether it does or not.
- There is a good chance it could be similar to Julia.
I'm not sure, but now I'm gonna look it up
'cause I'm curious.
- Now you gotta know.
- Yeah, maybe we can steal some from them, who knows?
- Yeah, exactly, oh, they did do that one thing here.
So I think the pep is interesting, the pep 659,
people can check that out, but like you said,
it's informational, so it's not really
the implementation exactly.
- Yeah.
So let's talk a bit about your project
that you did in addition to just being on the team.
It's a personal project that you did
that basically takes all of these ideas
we've been talking about and says, well, two things.
One, can I take code and look at that and get that answer?
Again, kind of back to my code coverage example,
like coloring code lines to mean stuff.
And then what's interesting about this,
and we'll talk through this example that you put up,
is there's actionable stuff you could do
to make your code faster
if you were in a super tight loop section.
Like I feel like applying this visualization
could help you allow Python to specialize more
rather than less.
- Yeah, I mean, in general,
this tool is really useful for us as maintainers
of the specialization stuff
because we get to see where we're failing to specialize.
Because ideally, if we've done our job well,
you should get faster Python without changing your code at all.
So first and foremost, this is a tool for us in our work
so that we can see, OK, what can we still work on here?
But that is sort of a cool knock-on effect
is that if you do run on your code, you also
know where it's not specializing.
And if you know enough about how specialization works,
you may be able to fix that.
But I would say a word of caution against getting two in the weeds
and trying to get every single bytecode to do what you want
because there are much better ways of making your code faster, I think.
Yeah, absolutely.
Well, but there are places where you're like,
these two functions, I know we got 20,000 lines of Python,
but these two, which are like 20 lines,
they are so important and they happen so frequently.
Anything you can do to make them faster matters.
People rewrite that kind of stuff in Rust or in Cython.
Before you go that far, maybe adding a dot zero
on the end of a number is all it takes.
Something like that, right?
That's kind of what I'm getting at.
Not to go crazy or try to think you should mess
with the whole program, but there are these times
where five lines matter a lot.
- Yeah, sure.
- Okay, well tell us about your project specialist.
Yeah, so one really cool thing that our specializing
adaptive interpreter does is we've
worked really hard to basically make it easy for us
to get information about how well specializations are
working.
So you can actually compile Python.
It'll run a lot slower, but you can compile Python
with this option with pystats.
And that basically dumps all of the specialization stats.
- Yeah, and you actually pointed out that you can,
in the Faster CPython Ideas section,
it lists out like a--
- Yeah, so there's tons of counters.
So you can see that when we run our benchmarks,
load adder instance value is run, what, two billion times?
Almost three billion times?
And it misses its assumptions, 1% of those.
Yeah, and so there's tons of these counters
that you can dump.
And that's really cool,
'cause we can run our performance benchmarks
and see how those numbers have changed,
And even cooler than that, it allows us kind of separately
to--
for example, there's been at least one case
where we've worked with a large company that
has a big private internal app.
And they can run it using Python 3.11.
And we can get these stats without actually looking
at the source code, which is really cool.
And so we can see--
>> We want to help you be faster.
And we're working on the runtime, but we don't want to--
>> But you don't want to show us your code.
And so we're not going to look at it.
>> You might not want to see it, yeah.
And so those stats are really useful for knowing,
OK, 90% of my attribute access were able to be specialized.
What about that remaining 10%?
Where are they?
And then an additional question, why couldn't they
be specialized?
And that's something that's a lot easier to tell when
you're looking at the code.
And so this tool was basically--
my original intention for writing it
is once we get beyond seeing the stats for a benchmark,
can we run something on it that makes it easy to tell at a glance
where we're failing and how.
Right, it's like saying that's 96% code coverage
versus these two lines are the ones that are not getting covered.
Exactly, you get a lot more information from actually getting those line numbers
than from the 97% or whatever.
Yeah, and so basically the way it works,
we already talked about how in the DIS module,
you can see which instructions are adaptive or specialized.
And all that this tool does is it visualizes it for you.
So literally, the implementation of this tool
is just a for loop over this, where we just kind of
categorize the different instructions
and then map those to colors and all sorts of crazy nonsense.
Yeah, and for people listening, imagine some code.
And here you've got a for loop with the tuple decomposition.
So you got for i,t in the numerator text
that I go do some stuff.
And it has the i and the t turned green,
but then some dictionary access turned yellow.
And it talks about, is it not at all specialized?
Is it, did it try but fail to get specialized
and things like that, right?
- Yep, yeah.
Green indicates successful specializations.
Red are those adaptive instructions that are slightly slower and represent missed specializations.
And yellow and orange are kind of a gradient.
Because as we talked about, you know, one line of Python code can easily be 10 or 25 code instructions.
So, you know, it's kind of a way of compressing that information into a visually pleasing form.
And one thing I want to point out about this too is,
you'll notice it's actually, you see characters within a line.
And this is something that's really cool because this is piggybacking
on a feature that's completely unrelated to specialization.
Originally, when I was writing this, it highlighted each line.
So you can see this line was kind of green, or this line was kind of yellow.
But then I remembered, maybe you're familiar,
In Python 3.11, we have really, really informative tracebacks
where it will actually underline the part of the code
that has a syntax error or that has an exception that was raised or something.
Yeah, and so that's the pep that's linked first in the description there.
It's called fine-grained error locate or fine-grained locations and tracebacks.
Yeah.
And so what that means is that previously we just had line number information in the bytecode,
but now we have line number and end line number and start column and end column information,
which means that due to this completely unrelated feature,
we can now also map it directly to which characters in a source file correspond to individual bytecode instructions.
That's super cool.
Yeah.
- Yeah, so for example, here we've got a string
and you're accessing it by element, by passing an index,
and you were able to highlight the square brackets
as a separate classification on that array indexing
or that string indexing.
- Exactly, so it wouldn't have been as helpful
to just see that that line was kind of yellow-orange-ish.
You know, we see that the fast variable store
was really, really quick.
we see that the modulo operation
and the indexing of string by int wasn't that fast.
We weren't able to specialize it,
but we were able to specialize the lookup of the name key,
i, and len.
Weren't able to specialize the function call of len on key.
So that sort of information, that granularity,
is really, really cool.
>>Yeah, it is super cool.
And I think a good way to go through this,
you got some more background that you write about here,
but we've already talked a lot about specializing.
- Yeah, this is just summarizing the pet basically.
- Yeah, exactly.
People can check it out there if they want the TL,
the too long didn't read version.
But you've got this really nice example
of what may be in the first few weeks
of some kind of Python programming class.
Write a program that converts Fahrenheit to Celsius
and Celsius to Fahrenheit.
and then just test that round tripping numbers
gives you basically the same answer back
within floating point variations, right?
- Yeah, I really like this example because it,
as we'll show it, it's kind of presented
through the lens of performance optimization,
but it also does a good job of showing you
kind of how the interpreter works
and how those little tweaks kind of cascade.
- Absolutely.
And it highlights certain things you can take advantage of
that if you just slightly change the order,
it actually has a different runtime behavior, which we
don't often think about in Python.
We were doing C++.
We would maybe debate, do you dereference that pointer first,
or can you do it in the loop?
But not so much here.
So let's go through--
I mean, I guess just to remind people, Fahrenheit Celsius,
you would say x equals f minus 32.
And then you multiply the result once you've shifted the zero
by 5 divided by 9.
And the reverse is you multiply the Celsius by 9 divided by 5.
And then you add the 32 to shift the zero again.
And basically, that's all there is to it.
And then you go through and say, well,
let's run the specialist on it to get its output.
And maybe talk about this first variation that we get here.
>>Yeah, so as we were talking about,
the red indicates there's adaptive instructions.
and the green indicates the specialized instructions.
So we can see here that some things were specialized very well.
For instance, look at assertRoundTrip.
That's bright green.
Because it's in that hot loop,
we got enough information about it to say,
"Okay, assertRoundTrip is being loaded from the global namespace,
and it's a Python function, so we can do that cool
Python to Python call optimization."
and that's basically as fast as any function call in Python is going to be.
But some things aren't specialized.
So the things that jump out, the things that we may want to actually
take a closer look at would be the math, which is yellow and red.
So, for instance, we can...
the loads of the local variable f in that first function
and the load of the constant 32.
Those are yellow because the math
that they're involved in, the subtraction operation,
wasn't specialized.
But the individual loads of those instructions
were specialized.
I see.
So half yes, half no for what they were involved in.
Yeah.
Green plus red equals yellow.
So yeah.
So that subtraction wasn't specialized.
And the reason is in 3.11, just based on the heuristics
that we gathered, we determined it was worth it,
at least for the time being, to optimize int plus int
and float plus float, but not int plus float or float plus int.
And so what we're doing here is we're subtracting
a float and an int.
And so we're able to see that that isn't specializable.
But if we were to somehow change that so that it was two floats
or two ints, then it would be specializable.
Right.
Because when I look at it, it looks
like it absolutely should have been specialized.
a float minus an int, the int is even a constant.
Like you're, okay, well this is
standard math, and it's always a float, and it's always an int, and it's always
subtraction. It seems like that should just, well, the math
should be obvious and fast. But because, as you pointed
out, there's this peculiarity or maybe an implementation detail
for the moment. - Absolutely an implementation detail. - Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, if it's
It's an int and a float.
Well, right now that problem is not solved.
Maybe it will be in the future, right?
It seems like pretty low-hanging fruit, but--
Well, specializations aren't--
--all the variations, right?
Yeah, specializations aren't free.
So for instance, when we're running
those adaptive instructions, we need
to check for all of the different possible
specializations.
So every time we add a new specialization,
that has some cost.
And basically, we determined, at least for the time being,
Like I said, we've tried to do int plus float and float plus int.
And at least based on the benchmarks that we have
and the code that we've seen, it just isn't worth it.
- Sure, okay. - Yeah.
- Yeah. - And it's something like int plus int
is very easy to do quickly.
Float plus float is very easy to do quickly.
Int plus float, there's some coercion that needs to happen there.
- Right, there's already cost in there. - So yeah, it's not something that...
It's something that costs some time to check,
but we don't have a significantly faster way of doing it.
[SIDE CONVERSATION]
and anyway, how about make it 32.0 instead of 32?
>> Yep.
>> And then bam, that whole line turns green, right?
Yeah, so now you're basically doing that entire line
using fast local variables
and native floating point operations.
You're just adding literally two C doubles together,
which is really cool.
>> Yeah, and this is what I was talking about,
where you could look at that line and go,
"Oh, well, I just wrote the integer 32,
but I'm doing floating point math.
It's not like I'm doing integer math.
So if you just put, you know,
write it as a constant with a zero, you know, dot zero on it
that's a pretty low effort change.
And here you go,
Python can help you more and go faster, right?
- Yeah, and that's not a transformation
that we can do for you
because if F is an instance of some user class
that defines dunder sub,
that would be a visible change
if it started receiving a float
as a right-hand argument instead of an int.
So those are things that we can't do
while making the language still the same.
- Right, but your specialist tool can show you.
And again, figure out where your code is slow
and then consider whether, don't just like,
well, we only got 100,000 lines,
who's assigned to specializing today?
- Yeah, and it also requires, this is a simpler example,
but it does require a somewhat deep knowledge
of how the specializations work.
because for things other than binary operations,
it's not going to become clear what the fix is.
You just see kind of where the--
I hesitate to even call it a problem,
but you see where there's the potential for improvement,
but not necessarily how to improve it.
Yeah.
And then you have another one in here
that's, I think, really interesting,
because so often when we're talking about math,
and at least commutative operations,
it doesn't matter which order you do them in.
Like 5 times 7 times 3.
If it's the first two and then the result,
or you multiply the last two, and unless there's
some weird floating point edge case
that the IEEE representation goes haywire, it doesn't matter.
And so for example, here you've got--
to finish off the Fahrenheit to Celsius conversion,
it's the x times 5 divided by 9.
And that one is busted too for the same reason,
because it's a 5.
Yeah, because-- so this is kind of for two reasons.
this line isn't as good as it could be under ideal conditions.
So, you know, x is a floating point number, 5 is an integer,
so we have the same problem.
We specialize multiplication for int and int and float and float,
but not for int and float.
And the division is even a different problem.
We don't try to specialize division at all,
just for the reason that it's kind of problematic,
because the right-hand side could be a zero,
and then you have to check for that,
and there's all sorts of things that you need to check for
that make it not as much of a payoff.
So we have both an operation that we can specialize,
but it isn't being specialized, and then another one
that we're not even trying to specialize at all.
Right, right, right.
But then back to the commutative thing,
you're like, well, what if we did the division?
What if we did the division like parentheses
five divided by nine, and then x times that, right?
- Yep, and so, waiting through more
of these implementation details,
Python's compiler, we have a bytecode compiler,
it's not compiling to machine code,
but it can perform simple optimizations like this.
So by changing the order of operations,
the bytecode compiler sees, oh, five divided by nine,
I can do that at compile time once,
rather than at runtime, literally every time
through the loop, 'cause that's never going to change.
And so by changing that--
- Regardless of specialization, yeah, sorry,
regardless of specialization, that's better anyway, right?
'Cause that happens when the PYC file is generated
or when the equivalent thing in memory is generated,
and then it's just known as a constant, right?
- Yeah, and you're doing no division of runtime anymore.
So you turn this from two operations,
one of which is pretty expensive, to just one operation.
all you're doing is a multiply by a constant now.
And so you can see that once we apply
that transformation to our code,
everything's all bright green and happy now in there.
This is as specialized as it can be.
- Right, because in Python 3,
five divided by nine is a floating point, right?
Doesn't modulo it out or whatever.
Yeah, so then it becomes float times float,
which then can be specialized in that first division part
is something that is done at runtime,
when it first runs, but only once,
which is fantastic, like parse time, basically.
So yeah, this function, or these functions,
this code is much better as a result of understanding.
- Yeah, and this transformation isn't something
that Python can do for you,
'cause it changes the semantics of the language.
Again, if X is some user object,
then it can observe the types that are being passed to it.
Or if it's like a array or something,
the D type could get messed up.
- Yeah, if it implements multiply,
it expected to receive the five.
It didn't expect to receive 1.2715
or whatever the heck that is, right?
- Yep.
- Yeah, cool.
All right, well, this is a really cool tool.
I definitely encourage people if they're listening,
just come over and just, there's pictures of code and color.
Just scroll quickly through it
to see what we're talking about.
And I find it super valuable
because it highlights with color
right on the code that you wrote.
It doesn't spit out the byte code
and say here's the byte code improvements,
but it highlights your code and says the code you wrote
is being improved by Python
or not being improved by Python here, right?
And just understanding that it might not matter
and it might matter a lot to you, it depends.
- Yeah, and another thing to highlight too
that's kind of different about this tool
from maybe most tools that you would use is,
this isn't static analysis.
It's not like mypy or PyLint where it's running over your code
just in its file.
You actually need to run your code under this tool
for it to be able to do its thing.
'Cause again, all this happens at runtime,
so it's only after running the code
that specialists can walk over and see
where they've adapted. - Running the code,
enough, right?
- Yes, yeah, so for example, if I just had this function
and I didn't actually call test conversions
at the bottom there, at the dunder name equals main,
everything would just be white,
because nothing actually ran.
- Right, right, so in this example here,
you've got, let's see, two, four, six, eight, nine,
surprising that number.
You have nine test values that you're passing in,
and you're looping over all those values and testing it.
So you need to, if you're gonna apply this to your code,
it's super important that you come up with a scenario
of representative data, for now, n greater than eight.
>> Or it's something that's loopy,
it runs loops eight times or something.
Basically, if the same bytecode instructions are being executed a bunch of times,
that's how we tell that it's hot,
whether that's in a loop or from repeated calls or whatever.
>> I can see it's pretty easy to forget that,
and people might run and go, "It didn't do anything.
It did nothing. It's just all white."
>> Yeah.
>> Maybe you should add.
I mean, I'm not trying to issue an audio PR or anything,
but maybe it should have some kind of warning.
Like if there's zero color at all, like a warning,
like, are you sure you ran it?
Because we don't think you did anything.
- I actually really liked that request.
I'm gonna do that.
(laughing)
- Yeah, 'cause you would know, right?
Like you'd know if like,
I've colored nothing in any color whatsoever.
- Yes.
- And something's up.
- Yeah, and I look at it, I'm like,
oh, I did something wrong.
But someone else is gonna be like,
Brent did something wrong.
- Yes, exactly.
- Got to protect my reputation, yeah.
- Well, and just like limit the issues being raised.
Like how many times do you want to say,
did you remember to call it enough times?
Yeah.
- Yeah.
- Cool, I definitely think people should check this out
if they're interested in seeing how
the adaptive specializing,
specializing adaptive interpreter from Python 3.11
is applied to their code.
I guess also other caveat, like really not super handy
if you try to do this with 3.10, you gotta have 3.11?
It refuses to run under 3.10.
Just because I accidentally made that mistake enough times
where I just had the Python environment I had active was 3.10
and like, it's not working.
The keyword argument doesn't exist.
Yeah, all that stuff.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So, so yeah, no, you need to be running 3.12, but,
or sorry, 3.11 or 3.12.
But, you know, as you showed earlier,
you can download it from python.org.
My favorite way of installing Python versions, Pyenv,
has had 3.11 dev for a while now.
They also have 3.12 dev if you are crazy and you want to try it out.
But yeah, you do need a 3.11 to use this.
Fantastic.
Well, really great work.
I think it's quite a contribution.
It really highlights all the work that's being done in 3.11.
So well done.
Thanks.
All right, now, before you get out of here,
I gotta ask you the final two questions.
If you're gonna write some Python code,
if you're gonna work on specialist,
what editor do you use?
- I use VS Code.
- Okay, right on.
And then notable PyPI package,
something you came across, like, oh, this thing is cool.
Maybe not the most popular, but something that--
- Yeah, I thought about this.
Can I say two?
Is it only a little bit more? - Yeah, two is fine.
No, two's good. - Okay, cool.
So there's two, I really like
creative packages that kind of blur the line between what is Python and what isn't.
So the first one is called PyMetal3, PyMTL3.
It's just M-T-L, yeah, three.
This is so cool, it allows you to design hardware using Python.
And you can basically design everything from just a small set of logic gates
to a full chip and then export it to Verilog
and run it on an FPGA.
And this is kind of my hardware background coming through.
But yeah, my brother is actually studying
at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo right now.
And he is on a research team that's
designing an entire processor in Python.
And so basically, the processor itself is designed in Python.
And you can test it with Python.
So they're testing with hypothesis.
And it's a really cool, creative way
of doing this sort of stuff.
>> Yeah, you don't need any special hardware
to make it happen either, right?
>> Yeah, exactly.
You can just run it on your local machine,
and now you've got a RISC-V chip running.
>> Nice.
>> Yeah, so the other one is another kind of cool, weird,
low-level hardware-y package.
I don't know if it counts as pip installable.
It's called PeachPi.
I don't know how well maintained it is,
but you have to do that thing.
Yeah, you have to do that thing where you tell pip to install
from like a GitHub link.
- All right, well, you can pip install from a GitHub link.
Just, you gotta give it a really weird URL.
It said just, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Okay, got it, sure.
- And so this is super cool.
It's an x86_64 assembler in Python.
So with this, you can basically implement a compiler,
or if you feel like it, a just-in-time compiler
for basically x86 hardware.
So what this allows you to do is, in your Python code,
it takes care of doing things like allocating hardware
registers and labeling jumps and all that sort of stuff,
calling conventions.
And so you can specify exactly what assembly instructions
you want to execute, assemble them,
and then it will package them up in a Python function object,
and you can call your assembly code from Python,
which I think is so cool.
- Wow, and it actually executes as assembly instructions?
- Yes, yeah, so it's like faults and everything, yeah.
- Well, yeah, of course.
It's the most common thing it does.
- Yeah, but I mean, like a simple example,
you can pass in a Py object pointer,
and then add, you know, eight or 16 or whatever
to get the type of it and then return that
and it will return the type.
- Yeah, very cool.
So you can see the code example on here for PeachBuy.
I'll put the link in the show notes,
but you do things like create an argument
and then you create a general purpose register
and you load the argument onto the register and whatnot.
And you might call them the ISA SSE4 operation
or whatever, pretty cool.
- Yep.
- Yeah, those are really, two really good ones.
All right, final call to action.
people are interested in Specialist and exploring the specializing adaptive interpreter.
What do you tell them?
I think the most important thing you can do is download or if you're feeling like it, build Python 3.11
and try running it for yourself. See if your code gets faster.
It probably will. If it doesn't, then Specialist could help show you where it's not.
And if that is surprising to you, then you could report it to us.
It's like, "Oh, my code got slower for some reason."
And it looks like this specific pattern is what's causing it.
That's something that we care about.
Yeah, I suspect this interpreter is something that's never done.
Yeah, there's always...
You can always add more cases.
Yeah, I mean, it's clear you could always add more cases.
you could make it decide sooner or easier
or more accurately when and how to specialize
and add more by, there's like a lot of stuff you could do,
right, as opposed to, well, yeah, now you read CSV file,
that part is done.
- Yeah, and again, if you're feeling up to it
and you've got a huge pure Python app,
you can even compile with stats and dump that out
and take a peek at it.
And, you know, we, I think you showed our repository earlier
where we have our issue tracker,
where we kind of just spitball ideas
and keep track of work in progress.
Yeah, this one.
If you go to the issue tracker here.
- Ah, sorry, I was wrong.
And the ideas one, yeah.
So you've got, it's faster-cpython/ideas on GitHub.
- Yeah, so if you go to issues there,
that's all our work in progress.
And if you have experience optimizing dynamic languages
or if you see a cool research paper
or something that you want us to know about,
you can open an issue here and, you know,
this is where things get done.
- Yeah, fantastic.
Well, thank you for making Python faster.
I think it's really, really important.
I mean, I'm always a little bit conflicted
because I have some pretty complicated web apps
that get a decent amount of traffic
and they've been fine, like really, really fine.
You know, handful of milliseconds response time
and they're doing all sorts of madness with databases
and HTML and all kinds of stuff.
So on one hand,
I don't know if I need Python to be faster.
But on the other, you know,
people are deciding which language they're going to choose
and where they can do their work.
And sometimes, either perceived or real reasons,
people think Python is not fast enough, right?
And so this is important work
that will really help some people
and will help the community be stronger.
So thank you.
- Yeah, we love Python programmers.
- Right on.
All right, cool.
Thank you so much for being here.
It's great to chat with you.
>> Yeah. Thanks again for having me.
>> Yeah, you bet. Bye.